p. 2

the living (therefore mortal) body is the central object of all politics. There are no politics that are not body politics. The body is not first a given biological organism on which power then acts. The very task of political action is to fabricate a body, to put it to work, to define its modes of production and reproduction, to foreshadow the modes of discourse by which that body is fictionalized to itself until it is able to say “I.”

p. 4

The liberal and patriarchal-colonial European democracies of the nineteenth century constructed the ideal of the modern individual not only as a free economic agent (male, white, heterosexual) but also as an immunized body, radically separated, that owed nothing to the community. It is this immunitary ethos that defines current border regimes and underpins the militarized strategies deployed by ICE at the US-Mexico frontier and by Frontex to defend the Schengen Area. The body’s immunity, Martin states, is not a biological fact independent of cultural and political variables. Immunity is constructed through social and political criteria that produce sovereignty or exclusion,

Tell me how your community constructs its political sovereignty and I will tell you what forms your plagues will take.

an epidemic radicalizes and shifts biopolitical techniques by incorporating them at the level of the individual body.

p. 6

The virus, neither living nor dead, neither organism nor machine, Derrida said, is always the foreigner, the other, the one from elsewhere.

Syphilis, a sexually transmitted infection, materialized in bodies the forms of repression and exclusion that dominated modernity. Thus the prostitute became the living body that condensed all abject political signifiers during the syphilis epidemic: As a working and often racialized woman, a body outside the laws of home and marriage, who turned her sexuality into her means of production, the sex worker was made visible, controlled and stigmatized as the principal vector of infection.

p. 9

Shift to a cyber-oral society, from an industrial to an immaterial economy, from a form of disciplinary and architectural control to forms of microprosthetic and media-cybernetic control. The more we consume and the better our health, the better we are controlled. Shift from an anthropocentric society where a fraction of the global human community authorizes itself to exercise a politics of universal extractivist predation to a society that is capable of redistributing energy and sovereignty.

p. 10

At least since the fall of the twin towers, governmental politics has been characterized by the redefinition of nation-states in terms of neocolonialism and identity and the return (after the Reagan-Thatcherite phase of neoliberalism, which stressed free movement and free trade) to the idea of the physical border as a condition for restoring national integrity and political sovereignty.

p. 11

The destruction of Europe—for that is what we are witnessing—paradoxically began with that construction of an immune European community, open in its interior but completely closed to foreigners and migrants.

Your individual body has become the new territory where the violent border politics that we have been designing and testing for years on “others” are now expressed, now taking the form of containment measures and of a war against the virus.

p. 12

Strategies adopted by countries confronting Covid-19 exemplify two completely different types of biopolitical technology. The first, involving home confinement for the whole population. Strict spatial partitioning, the closing of towns and outlying districts, a prohibition against leaving the area. Everyone is ordered to stay indoors. The second strategy involves moving away from modern techniques of disciplinary and architectural control to pharmacopornographic techniques. The individual detection of the viral load through the multiplication of tests and constant digital surveillance of patients through their mobile devices. We do not need biometric bracelets. The cell phone has become the best bracelet: No one parts with it even when sleeping. Here, society is a community of users, and sovereignty is above all digital dominion and the management of big data.

Nevertheless, the governments that have implemented extreme digital surveillance measures have not yet envisioned prohibiting the traffic and consumption of wild animals or the industrial production of birds and mammals—which is at the origin of viral zoonosis production, including SARS-COV-2—nor the reduction of CO2 emissions. What has grown is not the immunity of the social body but the tolerance of citizens under the cybernetic control of the state and corporations.

p. 15

new utopia of the immunitary community and a new form of high-tech mass control of human bodies: The subjects are digital consumers equipped with credit cards. They do not have lips or tongues. They do not speak directly; they leave a voice mail. They do not gather together and they do not collectivize. They are radically un-dividual.

p. 16

That wage labor is itself an institution of confinement has never been clearer than now, as we witness “essential” workers as de-munized bodies brutally forced into spaces of lethal risk.

p. 17

the domestic space now appears as the new center of production, consumption, and political control.
